On September 16, 1806, newspaper editor and journalist, Isaac Mitchell
published his farewell editorial in his recently sold newspaper,
*Political Barometer*. Within this farewell address, Mitchell stresses
the important role the he and his newspaper play within the current
political climate. As a fervent supporter of Republicanism, Mitchell
declares that “As a political soldier, while I remain in the ranks, I am
willing to take my stand in that part of the line where I may be most
useful” (James Fenimore Cooper Society). For Mitchell, nothing was more
important and nothing more vital than preserving his political party’s
influence.

Although Mitchell was first and foremost a Jeffersonian political
soldier, he was also a newspaperman through and through. Born near
Albany, New York in 1759, he joined the newspaper business in 1798 in
Poughkeepsie, New York. In 1801, Mitchell joined the staff of *The
Guardian*. A year later he purchased an interest in the newspaper, and
in June of 1802, he and Jesse Buell were publisher and editor of the
paper they renamed *Political Barometer*. By May of 1805, Buell’s name
was removed as publisher and editor and Mitchell remained the sole
proprietor of the newspaper, until 1806.

Although Mitchell is best known for his serialized, Gothic work of
fiction, *The Asylum* (1804), he also published three additional long
serial stories, all of which were first printed in the *Political
Barometer*. These stories, *Albert and Eliza* (June 8, 1802 to July 13,
1802), *Melville and Phalez* (June 7, 1803 to July 26, 1803), and
*Alonzo and Melissa* (June 8, 1804 to October 30, 1804) at times, have
been ascribed to other authors. This was due to the common practice of
literary piracy that took place in the early American republic. It is
clear from a note to his work *Albert and Eliza* that he is indeed the
original author of all three *Political Barometer* works.

Although Mitchell went on to work as a newspaperman at other journals,
it is during his time at the *Political Barometer* that his most popular
works of literature were produced. Mitchell died from Typhus on November
26, 1812. Mitchell is buried in the Dutch Church Cemetery in
Poughkeepsie, New York, next to his wife, Anah.

Works Consulted

James Fenimore Cooper Society Website. “Isaac Mitchell: Collected
Works”. *James Fenimore Cooper Society,*
http://external.oneonta.edu/cooper/introduction/mitchell/mitchell.html.
Accessed 26 April 2017.
